# Assets

## CSS

- `scale.css`: modular scales for typography and space. This file defines some CSS custom properties and make them available globally by adding them to the `:root` selector. All the CSS custom properties defined in this file start with the `--scale` prefix, e.g. `--scale-step-0`. This file does **not** define any new CSS classes.
- `color.css`: colors. This file defines some CSS custom properties and make them available globally by adding them to the `:root` selector. All the CSS custom properties defined in this file start with the `--color` prefix, e.g. `--color-text`. This file does **not** define any new CSS classes.
- `font.css`: font-face definitions and default font families. This file contains all `@font-face` rules and sets the font families for serif, sans-serif and monospace fonts. The font families are available globally since they are added to the `:root` selector. All the CSS custom properties defined in this file start with the `--font` prefix, e.g. `--font-sans-serif`. This file does **not** define any new CSS classes, nor defines rulesets for HTML elements.
- `layout.css`: classes for layout primitives. They are quite small and have many use cases. Variations from the default configuration are set via data attributes, as described in [this article by Andy Bell](https://piccalil.li/blog/cube-css#heading-exception).
- `utilities.css`: atomic classes that do **one thing**.

## JS

- scripts for service worker registration
- scripts for the few components that require some Javascript.
- Use `defer` to asynchronously load a script which **requires** an element to be in the DOM (e.g. attach an event listener).
- Use `async` to asynchronously load a script which does not require the DOM to be ready, and which is completely independent from other scripts (e.g. ads). See also [Scripts: async, defer](https://javascript.info/script-async-defer).

## Fonts

I'm self-hosting all of my fonts because it's usually better for performance. See here:

- https://csswizardry.com/2019/05/self-host-your-static-assets/
- https://csswizardry.com/2020/05/the-fastest-google-fonts/
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FbguhX3n3Uc&ab_channel=WebConferencesAmsterdam

## Images

- The few images I self-host. All other images are hosted on my Cloudinary account.

## Other

- OAuth authorization server. It will be copied to `_site/.well-known/oauth-authorization-server` during each eleventy build.
- PGP public key. It will be copied to `_site/assets/pgp-key.txt` during each eleventy build.
- security.txt. Do not edit this file manually, re-generate it with the script [security-txt.mjs](../../../scripts/security-txt.mjs). The generated `security.txt` will be copied to `_site/.well-known/security.txt` during each eleventy build.
